

8 Ageedah (1) Islamic Creed


Introduction
to sound ageedah



a In this unit we will study

The meaning and

[
features of importance of
sound sound ageedah
ageedah (creed)

The principles
of Ahl as-Sunnah in
verifying issues of
aqeedah

Sources
from which
ageedah is
learned

1) Ageedah (1) Islamic Creed



Introduction to sound agqeedah:

The meaning and importance of sound aqeedah

Definition of sound ageedah:

In linguistic terms, the word aqeedah is derived from the word al-aqd, which refers to
tying, securing and pulling with strength.

Aqd (tying) is the opposite of hall (undoing). Krom the same root comes the word uqdah
which is used in the phrases uqdat al-yamin (binding oath) and uqdat an-nikah (the tie
of marriage). Allah jeg says: {A//ah will not impose blame upon you for what is unintentional
in your oaths, but He will impose blame upon you for [breaking] what you intended | aqqadtum|
of oaths} [al-Ma'idah 5:89].

Tawhid, Sunnah, usul ad-deen (principles of religion), al-fiqh al-akbar,

sharia a nd Ce mani.

In Islamic terminology, ageedah refers to “the ruling that is not subject to any doubts for
the one who believes in it.”

Some defined it as: “The issues that are proven and definitive, that one holds in one’s heart

as true and does not doubt them.”

Sound (sahih) means that it is free from all faults and errors.

_ Definition of sound ageedah:
~ Itis firm belief in Allah and what one should believe about Him in terms of His divinity,
His Lordship and His names and attributes. It also implies belief in His angels, His Books,

His Messengers, the Last Day, and His decree, both good and bad; as well as everything
that is mentioned in the sound religious texts of principles of religion, matters of the unseen
and whatever we are told about the unseen.

It is essential to believe in one's heart in a definitive manner, with no doubt or uncertainty,
as Allah jege says: (The believers are only the ones who have believed in Allah and His Messenger
and then doubt not} {al-Hujurat 49:15]. Chat is, they never doubted their faith.

Unit 1: Introduction to sound ageedah


The evidence for that is as follows:

_ 7 # ry] = 9 =e
} Fj wv iF i his 1 a ky t 2, a
tired oe Ter. Fae os fe Tag

[al-Bagarah 2:285].

The hadith of Umar ibn al-Khattab zz, according to which

Jibreel ai tatic asked the Prophet Acute Ail about taith (eeman), and

he said to him: «It is tc

Adi». Narrated by Muslim.

The importance of sound ageedah is
seen in the following points:

The importance of aqeedan:

It is the condition of righteous deeds being acceptable to Allah ge. It is a
means — after the mercy of Allah ‘gge — of attaining salvation in the hereafter
and admittance to Paradise, as He says: [So whoever would hope for the meeting
with his Lord - let him do righteous work and not assoctate in the worship of his Lord
anyone} {al-Kahf 18:110] and {A/lah has promised the believing men and believing women
gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally, and pleasant dwellings
in gardens of perpetual residence; but approval from Allah ts greater. It 1s that which ts
the great attainment} [at-Tawbah 9:72].

In contrast to that, deeds will not be accepted by Allah je if the doer has corrupt
aqeedah, and therefore that will be his loss in the Hereafter, as Allah jes says: {dnd
whoever denies the faith - his work has become worthless, and he, in the Hereafter, will be
among the losers} [al-Mvidah 5:5] and [And it was already revealed to you and fo those before
you that 1f you should associate [anything] with Allah, your work would surely become

worthless, and you would surely be among the losers} {az-Zumar 39:65).

Ageedah (1) Islamic Creed


What is meant by {41s work has become worthless} in the first verse and {your work would
surely become worthless} in the second verse is that the deeds are rendered null and void,
and the reward for them is lost. Therefore, they will carry no weight before Allah jg and

the doer will become a loser and will not gain anything in the Hereafter.

It is the core of the message of all of the messengers 2c. There is no messenger
whom Allah sent to his people but this sound belief was the first thing to which he
called them; the messengers paid a great deal of attention to that, as Allah ‘gs says:

{And We certainly sent into every nation a messenger, [saying], “Worship Allah and avoid

Taghut”} (an-Nahl 16:36].

3 Benetit
\e far Taghut refers to anything and anyone that is
w | worshipped besides Allah and approves of that.

Allah jg says: {And We sent not before you any messenger except that We revealed to him that,
“There is no deity except Me, so worship Me} [al-Anbiya 21:25).

Aqeedah is essential to the human being; it is more essential to him than air and

water, for without it he cannot know the correct and sound answers to the greatest

questions posed by humanity:
Where did I come from? Why was I created? Where will I go after death?
What is the outcome of not having an answer to these questions?

It is what we see today of misery, suffering, widespread mental illness, and rising
suicide rates, even in wealthy countries which claim to be advanced and civilized, as

is happening in countries such as Sweden, Denmark and others.
Only sound ageedah answers these important questions and other questions that

people wonder about and sincerely try to find answers to, so that their hearts will be

filled with certainty, tranquility, ease, assurance and faith.

Unit 1: Introduction to sound ageedah Well


ih

It is the means of attaining a sense of security and guidance in this world and
the Hereafter, as Allah Sa says: {They who believe and do not mix their belief with
injustice - those will have security, and they are [rightly] guided} (al-An‘am 6:82]. W hat is
meant by the words {and do not mix their belief with injustice} is: they do not mix
their faith with shirk.

Hence what we see today of the lack of any sense of security, and the spread of evil,
corruption, turmoil and killing in the Muslim world in general, and in the Arab
world in particular, is the result of people not adhering to sound aqeedah, or of
the prevalence of belief in that which contradicts it or differs from it in words and

deeds, as we shall explain below.

It isa means of abundant blessings coming from heaven and earth, as Allah jes
says: [dnd if only the people of the cities had believed and feared Allah, We would have
opened upon them blessings from the heaven and the earth} {al-A'raf 7:96).

The distinguishing features
of sound aqeedah are:

It is in accordance
with common sense
and sound human
nature

It is clear
It is moderate

It is
unchanging

Ageedah (1) Islamic Creed


The distinguishing features of sound ageedah are:

Sound Islamic aqeedah is distinguished from the beliefs of false religions and groups
who introduced innovations (bidah) by several features that make it more acceptable
to people, including the following:

It is a clear and straightforward belief, with nothing complex

about it. There is nothing mysterious in it, and no aspects of it
are exclusively for the clergy to understand.
[tis acommon-sense belief that is in harmony with innate
human nature, and is not contrary to it.
It is an unchanging belief that does not alter or develop with
the passage of time. [here is no room to add or subtract
anything, and it is not subject to distortion or alteration.

As for other beliefs, things have been added to them and
subtracted from them, because they were subject to the
whims and desires of rulers and monks.

It produces clear proof and evidence for every issue. Allah jes

says: [Say, “With Allah 1s the far-reaching argument } (al-An‘am 6:149].

It is a moderate belief which does not go to any extremes, and in

which there is no exaggeration or heedlessness.

Unit 1: Introduction to sound ageedah



16

We have seen above the definition and importance of sound ageedah. Here we will learn
about something that is of the utmost importance, which is: from where do we learn this
ageedah? This is what is called “the sources from which aqeedah is learned.” What are
these sources? And what is the evidence for them?

Before we speak about the sources and the evidence for them, we will point out a definitive
Islamic fact, which is that sound ageedah (belief in the oneness of Allah) is a common-
sense belief that is in accordance with innate human nature, meaning the principle that
all humans instinctively believe in this ageedah, and that since Allah created humans and
brought them into existence on this earth, they have held this belief in their hearts. What
that means is knowing Allah je, believing in His oneness, turning to Him at times of
hardship, and loving Him; it means that man has an innate inclination to accept and

choose the truth. This is supported by a great deal of evidence, including the following:

The verse in which Allah Xs says:

(ar-Rum 30:30).

ah (referred to in the translation above as “inclining to truth’) is Islam and its

pillars, as was explained by the leading scholars of the early generations si\.45.



The report narrated by al-Bukhari and Muslim from Abu Hurayrah 2edigs5, according to
which the Prophet ds.ieai\e said: «very newborn is born in a state of fitrah, then his parents
make him a Jew ora Christian ora Zoroastrian, just as animals bring torth animals; do

you see any deformed one among them?».

According to another version: « | here is no child who is not bornin a state of fitrah, then
his parents make him a Jew or a Christian or a Zoroastrian, just as animals bring forth °
animals with their limbs intact; do you see any deformed one among them?» :
The word translated here as intact refers to one that is complete and has all its limbs. The
word translated here as deformed refers to one that is missing limbs.

Then Abu Hurayrah 222i recited the words: {/Adhere to] the fitrah of Allah upon which
He has created [all] people. No change should there be in the creation of Allah . That 1s the correct

religion} lar-Rum 30:30]. Agreed upon

The report narrated by Muslim from Abu Hurayrah xzaitg in two different versions, in

which it clearly states that the fitrah is the religion of Islam. [hey are:

«| Allah said: | ‘And | have created My slaves with

an inclination towards the truth (hunafa), all of them, but the devils come to them and

drive them away from their religion, forbidding them that which | have permitted to

them and instructing them to associate with Me that for which I have not sent down

any authority ».

(sine. anit )

Unit 1: Introduction to sound ageedah


sources of sound ageedah

The first source | The Noble Ouran

The Noble Quran is a name for the miraculous words of Allah that were revealed to His
slave and Messenger Muhammad Acueaifie, of whom Allah ja says: { The Trustworthy
Spirit has brought it down Upon your heart, [O Muhammad] - that you may be of the warners

In a clear Arabic language} (ash-Shu'ara 26:193-195].

A great deal of evidence indicates that the Quran constitutes proof
from which we must take our aqeedah. That evidence includes the
following:

Evidence:

The Quran instructs us to follow its commands and forbids us to follow

it "| a a P
™ 2 os = own oe A oe oe 2 a Tt he ee Ce =e oe
ri r Fi r ae | | ro :
‘id f r “i P J Aq
Lio. GLO fiurg eh 4 bro

F a P J
. i so i | ee i i Fla dad oe
7

. [al-A’raf 7:3].

Everything in it is sound and true, as Allah (gg says:
[al-Bagarah 2:176], [Aal Imran 3:95];

fan-Nisa 4:122].

Ageedah (1) Islamic Creed


Evidence - continued:

It is the criterion that distinguishes between truth and falsehood, as Allah
[al-Furqan 25:1].
the Quran, because by means of it Allah ts

differentiated (farraqa) between truth and falsehood.

Allah has instructed us to refer to it in the event of dispute or conflict, as He
lee says: (And if you disagree over anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger,
if you should belteve in Allah and the Last Day. Thats the best [way] and best in
result} [an-Nisa 4:59] and {And in anything over which you disagree -its ruling ts /to

be referred] to Allah} [ash-Shura 42:10).

It is the definitive word which draws the line between what is in earnest and

what is in jest, and it is the farthest removed from falsehood and tampering,

as Allah ‘ge says: {Indeed, the Ouran is a decisive statement And it 1s not

amusement} [at-Tariq 86:13-14].

Unit 1: Introduction to sound ageedah


